README.md, before:

<img src="./images/denoising-diffusion.png" width="500px"></img>

## Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model, in Pytorch

Implementation of <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11239">Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model</a> in Pytorch. It is a new approach to generative modeling that may <a href="https://ajolicoeur.wordpress.com/the-new-contender-to-gans-score-matching-with-langevin-sampling/">have the potential</a> to rival GANs. It uses denoising score matching to estimate the gradient of the data distribution, followed by Langevin sampling to sample from the true distribution.

This implementation was transcribed from the official Tensorflow version <a href="https://github.com/hojonathanho/diffusion">here</a>

Youtube AI Educators - <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W-O7AZNzbzQ">Yannic Kilcher</a> | <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=344w5h24-h8">AI Coffeebreak with Letitia</a> | <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HoKDTa5jHvg">Outlier</a>

<a href="https://github.com/yiyixuxu/denoising-diffusion-flax">Flax implementation</a> from <a href="https://github.com/yiyixuxu">YiYi Xu</a>

<a href="https://huggingface.co/blog/annotated-diffusion">Annotated code</a> by Research Scientists / Engineers from <a href="https://huggingface.co/">🤗 Huggingface</a>

Update: Turns out none of the technicalities really matters at all | <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.09392">"Cold Diffusion" paper</a> | <a href="https://muse-model.github.io/">Muse</a>

<img src="./images/sample.png" width="500px"><img>

[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/denoising-diffusion-pytorch.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/py/denoising-diffusion-pytorch)

## Install

```bash
$ pip install denoising_diffusion_pytorch
```

## Usage

```python
import torch
from denoising_diffusion_pytorch import Unet, GaussianDiffusion

model = Unet(
    dim = 64,
    dim_mults = (1, 2, 4, 8)
)

diffusion = GaussianDiffusion(
    model,
    image_size = 128,
    timesteps = 1000,   # number of steps
    loss_type = 'l1'    # L1 or L2
)

training_images = torch.rand(8, 3, 128, 128) # images are normalized from 0 to 1
loss = diffusion(training_images)
loss.backward()
# after a lot of training

sampled_images = diffusion.sample(batch_size = 4)
sampled_images.shape # (4, 3, 128, 128)
```

Or, if you simply want to pass in a folder name and the desired image dimensions, you can use the `Trainer` class to easily train a model.

```python
from denoising_diffusion_pytorch import Unet, GaussianDiffusion, Trainer

model = Unet(
    dim = 64,
    dim_mults = (1, 2, 4, 8)
)

diffusion = GaussianDiffusion(
    model,
    image_size = 128,
    timesteps = 1000,           # number of steps
    sampling_timesteps = 250,   # number of sampling timesteps (using ddim for faster inference [see citation for ddim paper])
    loss_type = 'l1'            # L1 or L2
)

trainer = Trainer(
    diffusion,
    'path/to/your/images',
    train_batch_size = 32,
    train_lr = 8e-5,
    train_num_steps = 700000,         # total training steps
    gradient_accumulate_every = 2,    # gradient accumulation steps
    ema_decay = 0.995,                # exponential moving average decay
    amp = True,                       # turn on mixed precision
    calculate_fid = True              # whether to calculate fid during training
)

trainer.train()
```

Samples and model checkpoints will be logged to `./results` periodically

## Multi-GPU Training

The `Trainer` class is now equipped with <a href="https://huggingface.co/docs/accelerate/accelerator">🤗 Accelerator</a>. You can easily do multi-gpu training in two steps using their `accelerate` CLI

At the project root directory, where the training script is, run

```python
$ accelerate config
```

Then, in the same directory

```python
$ accelerate launch train.py
```

## Miscellaneous

### 1D Sequence

By popular request, a 1D Unet + Gaussian Diffusion implementation. You will have to do the training code yourself

```python
import torch
from denoising_diffusion_pytorch import Unet1D, GaussianDiffusion1D

model = Unet1D(
    dim = 64,
    dim_mults = (1, 2, 4, 8),
    channels = 32
)

diffusion = GaussianDiffusion1D(
    model,
    seq_length = 128,
    timesteps = 1000,
    objective = 'pred_v'
)

training_seq = torch.rand(8, 32, 128) # features are normalized from 0 to 1
loss = diffusion(training_seq)
loss.backward()

# after a lot of training

sampled_seq = diffusion.sample(batch_size = 4)
sampled_seq.shape # (4, 32, 128)
```

## Citations

```bibtex
@inproceedings{NEURIPS2020_4c5bcfec,
    author      = {Ho, Jonathan and Jain, Ajay and Abbeel, Pieter},
    booktitle   = {Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems},
    editor      = {H. Larochelle and M. Ranzato and R. Hadsell and M.F. Balcan and H. Lin},
    pages       = {6840--6851},
    publisher   = {Curran Associates, Inc.},
    title       = {Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models},
    url         = {https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/4c5bcfec8584af0d967f1ab10179ca4b-Paper.pdf},
    volume      = {33},
    year        = {2020}
}
```

```bibtex
@InProceedings{pmlr-v139-nichol21a,
    title       = {Improved Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models},
    author      = {Nichol, Alexander Quinn and Dhariwal, Prafulla},
    booktitle   = {Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning},
    pages       = {8162--8171},
    year        = {2021},
    editor      = {Meila, Marina and Zhang, Tong},
    volume      = {139},
    series      = {Proceedings of Machine Learning Research},
    month       = {18--24 Jul},
    publisher   = {PMLR},
    pdf         = {http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/nichol21a/nichol21a.pdf},
    url         = {https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/nichol21a.html},
}
```

```bibtex
@inproceedings{kingma2021on,
    title       = {On Density Estimation with Diffusion Models},
    author      = {Diederik P Kingma and Tim Salimans and Ben Poole and Jonathan Ho},
    booktitle   = {Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems},
    editor      = {A. Beygelzimer and Y. Dauphin and P. Liang and J. Wortman Vaughan},
    year        = {2021},
    url         = {https://openreview.net/forum?id=2LdBqxc1Yv}
}
```

```bibtex
@article{Karras2022ElucidatingTD,
    title   = {Elucidating the Design Space of Diffusion-Based Generative Models},
    author  = {Tero Karras and Miika Aittala and Timo Aila and Samuli Laine},
    journal = {ArXiv},
    year    = {2022},
    volume  = {abs/2206.00364}
}
```

```bibtex
@article{Song2021DenoisingDI,
    title   = {Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models},
    author  = {Jiaming Song and Chenlin Meng and Stefano Ermon},
    journal = {ArXiv},
    year    = {2021},
    volume  = {abs/2010.02502}
}
```

```bibtex
@misc{chen2022analog,
    title   = {Analog Bits: Generating Discrete Data using Diffusion Models with Self-Conditioning},
    author  = {Ting Chen and Ruixiang Zhang and Geoffrey Hinton},
    year    = {2022},
    eprint  = {2208.04202},
    archivePrefix = {arXiv},
    primaryClass = {cs.CV}
}
```

```bibtex
@article{Qiao2019WeightS,
    title   = {Weight Standardization},
    author  = {Siyuan Qiao and Huiyu Wang and Chenxi Liu and Wei Shen and Alan Loddon Yuille},
    journal = {ArXiv},
    year    = {2019},
    volume  = {abs/1903.10520}
}
```

```bibtex
@article{Salimans2022ProgressiveDF,
    title   = {Progressive Distillation for Fast Sampling of Diffusion Models},
    author  = {Tim Salimans and Jonathan Ho},
    journal = {ArXiv},
    year    = {2022},
    volume  = {abs/2202.00512}
}
```

```bibtex
@article{Ho2022ClassifierFreeDG,
    title   = {Classifier-Free Diffusion Guidance},
    author  = {Jonathan Ho},
    journal = {ArXiv},
    year    = {2022},
    volume  = {abs/2207.12598}
}
```

```bibtex
@article{Sunkara2022NoMS,
    title   = {No More Strided Convolutions or Pooling: A New CNN Building Block for Low-Resolution Images and Small Objects},
    author  = {Raja Sunkara and Tie Luo},
    journal = {ArXiv},
    year    = {2022},
    volume  = {abs/2208.03641}
}
```

```bibtex
@inproceedings{Jabri2022ScalableAC,
    title   = {Scalable Adaptive Computation for Iterative Generation},
    author  = {A. Jabri and David J. Fleet and Ting Chen},
    year    = {2022}
}
```

```bibtex
@article{Cheng2022DPMSolverPlusPlus,
    title   = {DPM-Solver++: Fast Solver for Guided Sampling of Diffusion Probabilistic Models},
    author  = {Cheng Lu and Yuhao Zhou and Fan Bao and Jianfei Chen and Chongxuan Li and Jun Zhu},
    journal = {NeuRips 2022 Oral},
    year    = {2022},
    volume  = {abs/2211.01095}
}
```

```bibtex
@inproceedings{Hoogeboom2023simpleDE,
    title   = {simple diffusion: End-to-end diffusion for high resolution images},
    author  = {Emiel Hoogeboom and Jonathan Heek and Tim Salimans},
    year    = {2023}
}
```

```bibtex
@misc{https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2302.01327,
    doi     = {10.48550/ARXIV.2302.01327},
    url     = {https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.01327},
    author  = {Kumar, Manoj and Dehghani, Mostafa and Houlsby, Neil},
    title   = {Dual PatchNorm},
    publisher = {arXiv},
    year    = {2023},
    copyright = {Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International}
}
```

```bibtex
@inproceedings{Hang2023EfficientDT,
    title   = {Efficient Diffusion Training via Min-SNR Weighting Strategy},
    author  = {Tiankai Hang and Shuyang Gu and Chen Li and Jianmin Bao and Dong Chen and Han Hu and Xin Geng and Baining Guo},
    year    = {2023}
}
```

Commit message:

Add Trainer1D for 1D diffusion
Replicates the usual Trainer, minus the image evaluation metrics and image saving; saves samples as pytorch files instead.
MMD could be considered as an alternative metric to FID.
Composition/inheritance could be considered to reduce code duplication with the 2D Trainer class

README.md, after:

<img src="./images/denoising-diffusion.png" width="500px"></img>

## Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model, in Pytorch

Implementation of <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11239">Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model</a> in Pytorch. It is a new approach to generative modeling that may <a href="https://ajolicoeur.wordpress.com/the-new-contender-to-gans-score-matching-with-langevin-sampling/">have the potential</a> to rival GANs. It uses denoising score matching to estimate the gradient of the data distribution, followed by Langevin sampling to sample from the true distribution.

This implementation was transcribed from the official Tensorflow version <a href="https://github.com/hojonathanho/diffusion">here</a>

Youtube AI Educators - <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W-O7AZNzbzQ">Yannic Kilcher</a> | <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=344w5h24-h8">AI Coffeebreak with Letitia</a> | <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HoKDTa5jHvg">Outlier</a>

<a href="https://github.com/yiyixuxu/denoising-diffusion-flax">Flax implementation</a> from <a href="https://github.com/yiyixuxu">YiYi Xu</a>

<a href="https://huggingface.co/blog/annotated-diffusion">Annotated code</a> by Research Scientists / Engineers from <a href="https://huggingface.co/">🤗 Huggingface</a>

Update: Turns out none of the technicalities really matters at all | <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.09392">"Cold Diffusion" paper</a> | <a href="https://muse-model.github.io/">Muse</a>

<img src="./images/sample.png" width="500px"><img>

[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/denoising-diffusion-pytorch.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/py/denoising-diffusion-pytorch)

## Install

```bash
$ pip install denoising_diffusion_pytorch
```

## Usage

```python
import torch
from denoising_diffusion_pytorch import Unet, GaussianDiffusion

model = Unet(
    dim = 64,
    dim_mults = (1, 2, 4, 8)
)

diffusion = GaussianDiffusion(
    model,
    image_size = 128,
    timesteps = 1000,   # number of steps
    loss_type = 'l1'    # L1 or L2
)

training_images = torch.rand(8, 3, 128, 128) # images are normalized from 0 to 1
loss = diffusion(training_images)
loss.backward()
# after a lot of training

sampled_images = diffusion.sample(batch_size = 4)
sampled_images.shape # (4, 3, 128, 128)
```

Or, if you simply want to pass in a folder name and the desired image dimensions, you can use the `Trainer` class to easily train a model.

```python
from denoising_diffusion_pytorch import Unet, GaussianDiffusion, Trainer

model = Unet(
    dim = 64,
    dim_mults = (1, 2, 4, 8)
)

diffusion = GaussianDiffusion(
    model,
    image_size = 128,
    timesteps = 1000,           # number of steps
    sampling_timesteps = 250,   # number of sampling timesteps (using ddim for faster inference [see citation for ddim paper])
    loss_type = 'l1'            # L1 or L2
)

trainer = Trainer(
    diffusion,
    'path/to/your/images',
    train_batch_size = 32,
    train_lr = 8e-5,
    train_num_steps = 700000,         # total training steps
    gradient_accumulate_every = 2,    # gradient accumulation steps
    ema_decay = 0.995,                # exponential moving average decay
    amp = True,                       # turn on mixed precision
    calculate_fid = True              # whether to calculate fid during training
)

trainer.train()
```

Samples and model checkpoints will be logged to `./results` periodically

## Multi-GPU Training

The `Trainer` class is now equipped with <a href="https://huggingface.co/docs/accelerate/accelerator">🤗 Accelerator</a>. You can easily do multi-gpu training in two steps using their `accelerate` CLI

At the project root directory, where the training script is, run

```python
$ accelerate config
```

Then, in the same directory

```python
$ accelerate launch train.py
```

## Miscellaneous

### 1D Sequence

By popular request, a 1D Unet + Gaussian Diffusion implementation.
```python
import torch
from denoising_diffusion_pytorch import Unet1D, GaussianDiffusion1D, Trainer1D

model = Unet1D(
    dim = 64,
    dim_mults = (1, 2, 4, 8),
    channels = 32
)

diffusion = GaussianDiffusion1D(
    model,
    seq_length = 128,
    timesteps = 1000,
    objective = 'pred_v'
)

training_seq = torch.rand(64, 32, 128) # features are normalized from 0 to 1
loss = diffusion(training_seq)
loss.backward()

# Or using trainer

trainer = Trainer1D(
    diffusion,
    dataset = training_seq,
    train_batch_size = 32,
    train_lr = 8e-5,
    train_num_steps = 700000,         # total training steps
    gradient_accumulate_every = 2,    # gradient accumulation steps
    ema_decay = 0.995,                # exponential moving average decay
    amp = True,                       # turn on mixed precision
)
trainer.train()

# after a lot of training

sampled_seq = diffusion.sample(batch_size = 4)
sampled_seq.shape # (4, 32, 128)

```
`Trainer1D` does not evaluate the generated samples in any way since the type of data is not known. 
You could consider adding a suitable metric to the training loop yourself after doing an editable install of this package
`pip install -e .`.
## Citations

```bibtex
@inproceedings{NEURIPS2020_4c5bcfec,
    author      = {Ho, Jonathan and Jain, Ajay and Abbeel, Pieter},
    booktitle   = {Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems},
    editor      = {H. Larochelle and M. Ranzato and R. Hadsell and M.F. Balcan and H. Lin},
    pages       = {6840--6851},
    publisher   = {Curran Associates, Inc.},
    title       = {Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models},
    url         = {https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/4c5bcfec8584af0d967f1ab10179ca4b-Paper.pdf},
    volume      = {33},
    year        = {2020}
}
```

```bibtex
@InProceedings{pmlr-v139-nichol21a,
    title       = {Improved Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models},
    author      = {Nichol, Alexander Quinn and Dhariwal, Prafulla},
    booktitle   = {Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning},
    pages       = {8162--8171},
    year        = {2021},
    editor      = {Meila, Marina and Zhang, Tong},
    volume      = {139},
    series      = {Proceedings of Machine Learning Research},
    month       = {18--24 Jul},
    publisher   = {PMLR},
    pdf         = {http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/nichol21a/nichol21a.pdf},
    url         = {https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/nichol21a.html},
}
```

```bibtex
@inproceedings{kingma2021on,
    title       = {On Density Estimation with Diffusion Models},
    author      = {Diederik P Kingma and Tim Salimans and Ben Poole and Jonathan Ho},
    booktitle   = {Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems},
    editor      = {A. Beygelzimer and Y. Dauphin and P. Liang and J. Wortman Vaughan},
    year        = {2021},
    url         = {https://openreview.net/forum?id=2LdBqxc1Yv}
}
```

```bibtex
@article{Karras2022ElucidatingTD,
    title   = {Elucidating the Design Space of Diffusion-Based Generative Models},
    author  = {Tero Karras and Miika Aittala and Timo Aila and Samuli Laine},
    journal = {ArXiv},
    year    = {2022},
    volume  = {abs/2206.00364}
}
```

```bibtex
@article{Song2021DenoisingDI,
    title   = {Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models},
    author  = {Jiaming Song and Chenlin Meng and Stefano Ermon},
    journal = {ArXiv},
    year    = {2021},
    volume  = {abs/2010.02502}
}
```

```bibtex
@misc{chen2022analog,
    title   = {Analog Bits: Generating Discrete Data using Diffusion Models with Self-Conditioning},
    author  = {Ting Chen and Ruixiang Zhang and Geoffrey Hinton},
    year    = {2022},
    eprint  = {2208.04202},
    archivePrefix = {arXiv},
    primaryClass = {cs.CV}
}
```

```bibtex
@article{Qiao2019WeightS,
    title   = {Weight Standardization},
    author  = {Siyuan Qiao and Huiyu Wang and Chenxi Liu and Wei Shen and Alan Loddon Yuille},
    journal = {ArXiv},
    year    = {2019},
    volume  = {abs/1903.10520}
}
```

```bibtex
@article{Salimans2022ProgressiveDF,
    title   = {Progressive Distillation for Fast Sampling of Diffusion Models},
    author  = {Tim Salimans and Jonathan Ho},
    journal = {ArXiv},
    year    = {2022},
    volume  = {abs/2202.00512}
}
```

```bibtex
@article{Ho2022ClassifierFreeDG,
    title   = {Classifier-Free Diffusion Guidance},
    author  = {Jonathan Ho},
    journal = {ArXiv},
    year    = {2022},
    volume  = {abs/2207.12598}
}
```

```bibtex
@article{Sunkara2022NoMS,
    title   = {No More Strided Convolutions or Pooling: A New CNN Building Block for Low-Resolution Images and Small Objects},
    author  = {Raja Sunkara and Tie Luo},
    journal = {ArXiv},
    year    = {2022},
    volume  = {abs/2208.03641}
}
```

```bibtex
@inproceedings{Jabri2022ScalableAC,
    title   = {Scalable Adaptive Computation for Iterative Generation},
    author  = {A. Jabri and David J. Fleet and Ting Chen},
    year    = {2022}
}
```

```bibtex
@article{Cheng2022DPMSolverPlusPlus,
    title   = {DPM-Solver++: Fast Solver for Guided Sampling of Diffusion Probabilistic Models},
    author  = {Cheng Lu and Yuhao Zhou and Fan Bao and Jianfei Chen and Chongxuan Li and Jun Zhu},
    journal = {NeuRips 2022 Oral},
    year    = {2022},
    volume  = {abs/2211.01095}
}
```

```bibtex
@inproceedings{Hoogeboom2023simpleDE,
    title   = {simple diffusion: End-to-end diffusion for high resolution images},
    author  = {Emiel Hoogeboom and Jonathan Heek and Tim Salimans},
    year    = {2023}
}
```

```bibtex
@misc{https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2302.01327,
    doi     = {10.48550/ARXIV.2302.01327},
    url     = {https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.01327},
    author  = {Kumar, Manoj and Dehghani, Mostafa and Houlsby, Neil},
    title   = {Dual PatchNorm},
    publisher = {arXiv},
    year    = {2023},
    copyright = {Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International}
}
```

```bibtex
@inproceedings{Hang2023EfficientDT,
    title   = {Efficient Diffusion Training via Min-SNR Weighting Strategy},
    author  = {Tiankai Hang and Shuyang Gu and Chen Li and Jianmin Bao and Dong Chen and Han Hu and Xin Geng and Baining Guo},
    year    = {2023}
}
```
